
Tipps & Tricks

Tipps & Tricks

Tips on using the fischertechnik TXT Controller
Peter King
Did you know that you can use non-fischertechnik webcams with the TXT controller? Or that
you can use the fischertechnik camera directly with Android devices? Read on to learn some
details about the TXT controller that you might not have been aware of.
1. The most important requirement of the
fischertechnik TXT controller (part no.
522429 or 153513) is the power supply!
Always ensure that you have a charged
battery or, preferably, use a mains adapter
especially during important operations such
as firmware upgrades. A supply
voltage of 8~10 Volts is required.
Important: ensure that a
minimum of 8 V is
maintained even
when outputs are
turned on!
2. Should the
ROBO Pro
software suggest that
a TXT firmware update
is required, always use the
USB cable connection
before proceeding with the
upgrade. Don’t forget to switch
the TXT controller off and on again
after downloading the new firmware!
3. After turning the WiFi or Bluetooth on
for the first time, always switch the TXT
controller off and on again to ensure that
any wireless operation is initialized. Also it
is a good idea to key the “Pairing Code” and
the “Network security key” into a TXT or
DOC file on your computer to facilitate
cutting and pasting when initializing the
WiFi or Bluetooth connection. Please note,
should your WiFi connection say “limited
connectivity”, simply switch the TXT

controller off and on again. If the WiFi
connection is working correctly, the status
will show “Activity” that is both sending
and receiving data!
4. When using Bluetooth on the
computer, plug in your Bluetooth
device or switch it on and ensure
that the Bluetooth icon is visible
in the notification area.
Right-click on the icon
and then select “Join a
Personal Area Network”. If it’s the
first
time
connecting
the TXT to the
computer, you will
need to “pair” the
device. Click “Add…”
and select the “TXT xxxx”
device, click “Next” and enter
the “Pairing Code”. Finally, once
the device appears as an “access point”
in the “Personal Area Network” window,
click “connect”. Please note that you should
now be able to check the “Network and
Sharing Center” and find that there is a
“Bluetooth Network Connection” and the
“Status” of this connection can be checked.
5. The backup battery compartment (pictured below) is underneath the TXT. Remove
the Phillips-head screw and, using a flat
screwdriver for assistance, press the latch
and remove the cover. The 3 V lithium coin



battery CR2032 is used to back up the RealTime Clock (RTC), maintaining the date
and time when the TXT is disconnected
from an external power source. Our tests
suggest that the battery should only last 1 to
2 years. Therefore, it might be best to
remove the battery if the TXT controller is
not being used for a long period of time.
When removing the battery, it is important
not to short-circuit the contacts. Please use
the procedure below and place the battery in
a safe location out of reach of young children as it represents a serious health hazard if
swallowed. You can measure the battery’s
voltage by connecting a cable to one of the
I inputs (set to Analog 10V in) and touching
the plugs to the battery’s terminals whilst
using the “Interface Test” in ROBO Pro.
The battery should be replaced if the voltage
is below 2.5 V (< 2500).

The TXT controller’s battery compartment.
Insert a strip of paper at the denoted location.

Insert a small strip of paper in the gap to act
as an insulator (see picture), use a small
screwdriver to lever the battery out of the
battery holder. Never attempt to lever the
battery out using the plastic case of the TXT
controller as damage can occur!
6. To set the “Date & Time” on the TXT
controller, press “Settings” and scroll down
by pressing the “∠” symbol (top RH corner)


and then press “Date & Time”. Note the
time is set as a 24-hour clock 00:00 to
23:59. The seconds are automatically reset
to zero when the green tick is pressed.
7. The TXT Discovery Set (part no. 524328)
includes a USB camera module which may
also be purchased separately (part no.
152522). This camera with microphone
may be used as a webcam on your PC or it
may be plugged directly into the TXT
controller’s USB A socket. The big advantage of the fischertechnik camera is that it
has adjustable focus (the picture above was
taken with this camera). In fact, any USB
camera which uses the Sonix SN9C259
image controller chip (e.g. ODROID USBCAM 720P) can be used with the TXT
controller.
The fischertechnik camera can be used with
Windows, Mac OSX and Linux. The
camera can also be plugged directly into
Android phones and tablets using a micro
USB-OTG adapter. For a suitable app, see
“UsbWebCamera” [1].
8. When the camera on the TXT controller
is being used (e.g. a program is running or
video is being viewed) it is important that
the camera should NOT be removed from
the USB socket. The TXT may freeze and
disconnecting the external power supply
and reconnecting again is the only way to
recover. Finally, do not attempt to preview
the camera on the TXT controller whilst
connected by Bluetooth. Bluetooth does not
have the necessary data transfer rate
required for camera viewing.
9. A number of TX and TXT Controller
apps are available for Android devices [2].

References
[1]

„Serenegiant“: UsbWeb. Android app
for USB cameras in Google Play,
2016.

[2]

Search for TX fischertechnik in
Google Play.

