

Tipps & Tricks

The fischertechnik Toolbox
Robin Nikolas Woszidlo
fischertechnik is a modular construction system which should contain everything out of the box.
Usually, you would not need any tools, and if you do, they are included, like that little yellow
screwdriver. Over the years you will notice though, that sometimes a few tools are needed. It is
annoying to always access my large toolbox for that, so I packed together my personal fischertechnik Box 500, with all the tools I need specifically for ft.
nik screwdriver, but the Wera one has enhanced usability because it is longer and has
a rotatable cap on its handle.


It includes everything I need for wiring,
mounting, or reworking of parts, or programming controllers.

Wiring
For mounting the plugs on wire, I first use a
Weicon No. 5 wire stripper, which offers a
good compromise between price and usability. It is specified for cable diameters
0.2 mm² and larger. According to my experience, it also works well for the fischertechnik 0.14 mm² wire. Stripping both
wires at once works just as well as stripping
one after the other.
To tighten the screws, I use a Wera 118005
screwdriver with a 0.4 mm · 2mm blade.
That is the same as the yellow fischertech-



Mounting
You probably all know the feeling of sore
fingers after a long day of building, but even
that is sometimes not enough, and a hub will
slip on an axle.
Especially for collet hubs and hub nuts, I
found a microfibre rag to be very useful. By
using it, I can grip all hub nuts (and the
worms I want to mount them on) very hard
and seize them to the maximum. The microfibre works so well, because it will grip
even the worm very well, because of its micro roughness. At the same time, it is soft

for the fingers and prevents soreness and injuries.
For flat hubs I sometimes use the hub
wrench from LPE, but thanks to the microfibre rag I rarely must do so. And if I do, it
is usually only in areas difficult to access by
hand.

Tipps & Tricks

type Knipex Super-Knips 78 61 125, selfopening by spring, without bevel. It is especially useful for separating axles or cutting
of cams.

A little hex key is used for small grub
screws contained in various aftermarket
axle connectors (e.g., a connector 5 mm
Power Motor to 4 mm ft-metal-axle).


Programming

microfibre rag

Modding
Some people ask: “Is it okay to modify
fischertechnik parts, or not?” I would always answer “Yes” and therefore always
have a small knife at hand. This one comes
from a set bought in a local drugstore, and
it fits nicely into the box. The larger one,
which was also contained in the set, is in my
normal toolbox. When doing more difficult
modding work, I prefer to use the large one
because of its larger handle.
Additionally, there is a pair of pliers, I use
filigree electronics end-cutting pliers of the

To program controllers, the box contains
the two mostly used types of cables. They
are only in that box for emergencies on exhibitions, at home I have all necessary cables on my desk.
The two cables are a USB-to-USB-A cable,
which was widely common for printers, external hard drives and the older controller
generations, and a USB to mini-USB, as
needed for TXT and ftDuino.
I hope to have given some inspiration on
how to put together your very own fischertechnik toolbox.

References
[1]

Gerhard Birkenstock: Die fischertechnik-Werkzeug-Wanne. 4/2015, S. 12–14.


